Title: Full of heart: an Undertale review 
Date: 2017-08-20 15:47
Author: Steven Maude
Tags: game, review
Summary: The world doesn't need another review of Undertale.
         Regardless, here's why I think you should play it.

## Playing Undertale fills you with determination

Undertale's almost two years old. Yet I only bothered to play it this
year. If you have a PS4 and never got it on PC, it was released this
week. While the PC version will have been much cheaper while on sale,
and runs on just about any hardware, if you really must play it on a
console, now you can.

Why didn't I bother sooner? Hype is one reason. When it's that vocal —
and with Undertale, it's near deafening — I always tend to do as [Public
Enemy
instructed](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Don%27t_Believe_the_Hype).
The other is its resemblance to 16-bit Japanese RPGs (JRPGs). While I
appreciate those games are much loved, I've never really shared that
affection.

When I did actually get round to Undertale on PC, it happened to be on
sale. I figured it was cheap enough to see if they hype was warranted
and I wanted an escapist diversion from real world events. It seemed as
good a game to try out.

Without spoiling too much, you're a human that finds yourself fallen
down a mountain, and lost somewhere in the underground world of
monsters. The rest of the game sees you journeying through to try and
find some route home. Mostly this is done by exploration, although there
are a few puzzles dotted along the way that need solving before you can
progress, and monsters that you can fight. So much, so familiar.

But it's a wonderful game.

Those aspects of JRPGs that I never got on with are kept to a minimum.
There's a minimum of backtracking. The random battles, a staple of that
genre, that prevent you from walking more than a couple of footsteps —
because *swoosh swoosh swoosh* TWO SLIGHTLY SURLY ENEMIES IN MATCHING
OUTFITS APPEAR, and *cue battle music* — are thankfully omitted too.

When you actually battle, the system is novel: a mixture of strategy and
shmup bullet dodging. Battles can even be avoided, and these options are
left open to the player to decide. Both in and out of battle mode, the
dialogue is predominantly witty and charming, and avoiding lazy
territory, instead of prolonged and awkwardly translated.

Another thing that the game does well is, without any spoilers, is
continually confronting you and challenging your expectations of the
situations you're placed in, at times akin to what something like The
Stanley Parable does in trying to break the fourth wall.

Without playing and without spoiling it, it's hard to convey that
without being anything other than handwavingly effusive. Characters and
combatants that only appear briefly don't just feel like they've been
arbitrarily placed there, but like they have a real back story, even if
that's not ever entirely revealed. And while the game has this rich
assortment of characters, it also has character itself, full of soul and
heart.

## Fantastic Mr. Fox

Undertale's singular cohesion is likely because it was largely the
product of one person's imagination, Toby Fox. And while its graphics
are simple, but functional, it is a polished game, backed by an
incredibly [strong
soundtrack](https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=SxNcKXjfaQo) also composed
by the developer.

I've been fairly lucky that the few games that I've played through in
recent years have been particularly good choices for one reason or
another. Undertale's another, and one of the more memorable. It
genuinely feels like an experience that would only work as a game, not a
book or film. True, you could describe a similar journey with similar
characters in print or on screen. But it's the act of playing through
and having to make decisions on how you play through that's intrinsic to
how it works and how it makes you feel; that's very different to a more
passive experience.

Where many otherwise good games fail is extending their gameplay through
repetition and tedium, churning out more of the same. Undertale avoids
this, keeping the core game short and sweet, but giving you the
opportunity to play through in a very different play style. I'll
definitely look forward to revisiting that world in a few months.
(That's a really strong compliment from me. I have so little time to
play games these days that there are very few that I'd ever return to
once I've played through.)

Undertale is the perfect game for a Sunday afternoon where rain is
beating down your windows, a dull Tuesday where you're miserably plagued
with cold, or maybe even a snowy Thursday where you have the luxury of
being snowed in, unable to get to school or work, and are just warming
up with hot chocolate after already having been out to play in the snow.

It's that kind of game.
