Title: Rinse FM's SoundCloud account takedown
Date: 2017-07-15 23:11
Modified: 2017-07-18 21:56
Author: Steven Maude
Tags: music, radio, Rinse FM, SoundCloud
Summary: What the deletion of Rinse FM's SoundCloud account for
         copyright infringement tells us both about music industry
         short-sightedness and hosting creative projects online.

!!! article-edit ""
    Edit 2017-07-18: SoundCloud have now restored [Rinse FM's
    account](https://twitter.com/geeneus/status/887050524067061760).

    Nonetheless, the points below still stand in relation to hosting
    content under online accounts that have the potential for
    copyright takedowns.

## And it's shutdown

For many dance music lovers, the taking down of Rinse FM's SoundCloud
profile yesterday was a sad event. Along with their account, a huge
archive of shows they hosted on SoundCloud have all gone due to
[copyright
infringement](https://twitter.com/geeneus/status/885984092449366021)
complaints.

It's difficult to overstate Rinse's influence in dance music. The
station was heavily instrumental in pushing grime, and later dubstep in
the UK, and contributing to the massive spread of these genres outside
of these shores. While much of the UK radio broadcast frequency space is
pumped full of the same cloying pop music being endlessly
recirculated,[^1] Rinse FM is a refreshing breath of fresh air.

Rinse FM started life as a pirate station, [broadcasting illicitly via
aerials perched on tower block
rooftops](https://www.theguardian.com/media/2012/sep/30/rinse-fm-former-pirate-station-18-birthday),
but more recently acquired a legal license. Peculiar then that they are
now legitimate under the traditional broadcasting regulations, but don't
have the same freedoms when distributing those same broadcasts via the
internet.

Fortunately Rinse has an established physical presence as an FM station
and a fanbase built long before the internet became popular for
distributing music. Rinse also has a sizable following on other social
networks, allowing them to communicate what's going on, and, probably as
important, a web site that lets them continue to put out their shows
uninterrupted, via live streaming and podcasts.

Without seeing their SoundCloud playback statistics or their web
analytics before and after this change, it's difficult to know how much
of an impact that has on the number of people listening to Rinse FM
online. But, given the news of SoundCloud's redundancies this week, it
may well be that *everyone's* profiles are [getting deleted from
SoundCloud sometime
soon](https://techcrunch.com/2017/07/12/soundshroud/) like it or not.
Perhaps any impact on Rinse's future prospects may well be minimal.

But, such an account deletion could be disastrous for the progress of a
smaller project, say a independent producer, or a niche podcast, who are
maybe start to make waves. All of a sudden their content evaporates
(easy to replace somewhere else) together with all of their following on
that site (perhaps more difficult to rebuild).

## What can we take away from this takedown?

### It seems a backwards step for the music industry

Take a look at [the podcast](http://rinse.fm/podcasts/) page and, in any
given week, you'll see a diverse range of artists hosting shows, and
invariably a top line up. Today, you have a house legend, Masters At
Work's Kenny Dope, on only a couple of hours after alternative
electronic producer, [Forest
Swords](https://forestswords.bandcamp.com/). Whether old hands or not,
the hosts are often influential taste makers.

Because of that, Rinse's audience no doubt overlaps with who the music
industry are targeting: young and early adopters of new music. Why then
does someone, somewhere presumably think it's a smart move to hinder
that?  These listeners likely form the dedicated audience that same
industry is crying out for: those that will go out and track down music,
share it with their friends, go to shows to see acts playing out, or
even become the next big DJs or producers of the future.

Here's another thing: many of Rinse's shows are in a mix format. That's
because mixes are a natural way of presenting modern dance music. Maybe
I'm naive as to the machinations of the music industry, but both as a
listener, and as a (mediocre) DJ, it's difficult to see the logic behind
[taking down DJ mixes at
all](http://djtechtools.com/2017/06/15/drake-hate-dj-mixes-soundcloud-copyright-strikes-vs-dj-mixes/).

As well as creative expression and entertainment in their own right,
mixes can act as promotional tools. The featuring of tracks in mixes may
well encourage listeners to buy the tracks, or at least to head over to
a streaming service to hear it uninterrupted. Keep in mind that a track
in a mix isn't usually a substitute for hearing the track end-to-end:
they're different contexts. And DJs listening in may well decide to
shell out for the full track to play in their own sets. When there's so
much music, past and present competing for attention today, you'd think
that *anything* that might nudge listeners to a given label's artists
would be welcome.

### Where to host projects?

So if you're starting with a project that you're serious about and you
want it to reach the audience you're aiming for, what do you do? What
this situation tells me is that it's vital to be cultivating a following
in multiple places. That way you're not back to square one should your
profile on a single site be taken down.

Right now, I have an idea for a music-related project I'm intending to
put together. To keep things simple starting out, I'd considered just
having the project exist as a SoundCloud account, instead of creating a
blog to go with it. After this week with the Rinse FM takedown, coupled
with the possibility of SoundCloud disappearing, my thinking has shifted
entirely.

Owners of accounts on online services, as I've written before,[^2] have
little real ownership of what happens with those accounts. If the site's
owners or moderators don't like what you're doing for whatever reason,
you're gone. Someone might complain about what you're doing on the
service, just as happened to Rinse FM, and likewise you're gone. For
what I'm planning, it's very unlikely that copyright claims would be an
issue, but the potential of having your account taken down for some
other reason, and perhaps outside your control, still stands. 

Certainly, radio stations like Rinse and DJs could try their luck on
Mixcloud or other alternative sites, but there's nothing to say that the
same copyright issues might occur there in future, even if those sites
are relatively permissive now.

It's difficult. The big services are those where the users are. Creators
are often tied to publishing using those services if they want to get
people interested, as those services are where people are browsing,
searching and listening. But, over-reliance on a particular service
means that if it fails you, either destroying your account on a whim, or
because the site itself is shutdown, the knock-on impact for getting
visibility (or audibility) for creative projects can be a big blow.
Hedging your bets seems the only viable solution.

[^1]: Don't get me wrong. I'm very much not against pop music. The
      "same" in that sentence is an important qualifier of why I
      dislike those stations so, so much. It's the lack of individuality
      and the repetition that gets me. If you flick through the
      commercial pop stations, could you tell them apart?

      When there's so much music that I know I'll never have enough time
      to discover and hear, it's such a pity that show producers and
      station bosses are often so unadventurous.

[^2]: Look [what happened to my GitHub account last year]({filename}../2016/github-human-detection.md),
      for example.
