Title: Type:Rider: A Re:view 
Date: 2017-03-29 00:31
Author: Steven Maude
Tags: game, review
Summary: What the PC game, Type:Rider, taught me about fonts.

## A journey through history

> Typography is ubiquitous and present in our daily lives, often without even
noticing it.

That's a quote from [Type:Rider](http://typerider.arte.tv/), what the
developers call a "game documentary" and what I'd call a slightly frustrating,
albeit compelling museum-style whistle stop tour through fonts and typography
across human civilisation.

But the quote is spot on. Typography is everywhere, and though that's difficult
to imagine for us today — just take a look around — it wasn't always like that.

Type:Rider goes on a journey from cave paintings, through to early writing
systems, such as cuneiform and hieroglyphics, then onwards to the spread of
printing across late medieval Europe, and the continued development of fonts,
typography, all the way to the current age where words being marked on media
has made way for being displayed on screen instead. So then, this is as much a
study of the spread of information.

Not only is it a journey through history for the player, but for the two dots
comprising a colon that the player controls. They roll along the level and can,
somewhat inexplicably, jump and wall jump.

## Type:Rider is no NightSky

Why two dots when, say, a full stop could have sufficed? Perhaps that's to
avoid accusations of being a clone of Nifflas' relaxing
[NightSky](http://nifflas.ni2.se/?page=NightSky). If anything, the extra dot is
a hindrance; it makes the clumsy platforming even clumsier, and doesn't really
add anything to the gameplay.

Extra dot aside, it is reminiscent of NightSky (itself a game you should check
out) and I think the difficulty and the slightly sparse, often monochrome
foreground level layouts are why comparisons are drawn to Playdead's
[Limbo](http://www.playdead.com/games/limbo/). That, as well as the difficulty.
The difficulty is another reason that Type:Rider seems to get compared to
Trials, but this is a more loose association only. The Trials games are finely
balanced and tuned, so as to allow for mastery of very delicate, precise
controls. Type:Rider, unfortunately, is not. Quite often you'll end up bouncing
off uselessly from walls, or find your [pitiful leaps are insufficient to jump
the chasms](https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=xfKhDiUNOG0) that you need to.

OK. It's not actually that glitchy — it's definitely no [Sonic the Hedgehog
2006](https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=3MWEHwvcnyM) — but the floatiness of how
the dots "jump" and move, mean that there are some sections that are
frustrating where you'll repeatedly bounce to your doom. With the addition of a
couple of cheap instant death sections which seem like they were thrown in as
attempts to add tension, it would have been just nicer to have a relaxing, easy
to progress through, game.

On the plus side, restarts are quick and the checkpoints frequent, so it's rare
that you find yourself repeating familiar ground. It does still break the flow
of what would be an otherwise relaxing experience, but this at least tempers
player frustration. 

## But Type:Rider's still worth a look

That's all a pity, because the actual atmosphere, that of something like a very
immersive museum exhibit is a pleasant one. The graphic designs of the levels,
and the integration of fonts into them, are well thought out, and thematically
cohesive in the ideas they're trying to portray and show imagination. The
historical background is provided via brief, but informative, texts that are
collected throughout the levels.

There are some peculiar issues, likely due to a quickly thrown together English
localisation. There is one notably particularly bad translation that recurs
throughout: the term *wheelbase* peculiarly gets mentioned in the text several
times. The Steam discussion forum for the game actually answered this: it's a
[badly proofread
translation](https://www.collinsdictionary.com/dictionary/french-english/empattement):
it should be *serif*. Likewise, there are some weird text kerning issues in the
history text too, and it's likely that these too don't occur in the French
original. But that's an oversight considering that the game is dealing with
typography.

The scope of the game means that it is limited to telling a few stories, but as
an introduction to some of the big names in history and the technological
advances made, it does a good job. It is interesting just how important the
onset of widespread dissemination of information has been, and the impact that
has had since. We take the immediacy of that for granted now — you could well
be reading this text that I wrote seconds after I published it on this site,
wherever you are in the world — but the distribution of printed works on any
useful scale wasn't even a concept until the late medieval period, just a few
hundred years ago. It's difficult to comprehend that when information is so
central to society now.

It's also interesting where Type:Rider leaves off, which is the development of
[markup languages](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Generalized_Markup_Language),
and computer bitmap and vector fonts. A really big omission, perhaps because it
was made a few years ago, back in 2013, is emoji. (However, emoji were big
enough in 2013 to make it into the [Oxford English
Dictionary](http://public.oed.com/the-oed-today/recent-updates-to-the-oed/previous-updates/december-2013-update/new-words-katherine-martin/).)
Electronic communication saw the incorporation of emoticons, constructed from
text to hint at tone where plain text may be ambiguous. That's been followed by
the widespread use of emoji, where characters visually represent concepts or
objects, and so that nicely brings us full circle: modern day communication
harking back to how writing systems first began.

If the idea of spending a couple of hours learning about typography is
something that sounds appealing, Type:Rider's worth spending the time with.
Just take the gameplay for what it is, which is occasionally relaxing,
sometimes frustrating, be prepared to work through the trickier sections. It's
certainly hard to dislike a work that even manages to make a valiant attempt of
painting [Comic Sans
MS](https://www.theguardian.com/artanddesign/2017/mar/28/how-we-made-font-comic-sans-typography)
in a somewhat sympathetic light.
