Title: The death of the desktop PC?
Date: 2014-03-17 19:11
Author: Steven Maude
Tags: laptop, tablet, desktop, PC
Slug: the-death-of-desktop-pc

Today I saw [this clip](https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=zO4JIg-68gg)
which declares that desktop PCs are ready to be consigned to the
dustbin. To some extent, they're absolutely right.  
  
Laptops, tablets and smartphones are **the** mainstream computing
devices right now. If you're in the UK and on a train journey, take a
look around. (You'll probably need to drag your eyes away from your own
tablet or smartphone first.) From my own experience, I know that my
parents now spend most of their home computing time using tablets and
don't find this limiting.  
  
Then again, I'm quite the opposite. Last year, I reluctantly bought my
first laptop for work, and **still** haven't been converted to mobile
devices.  
  
So, why such distinct differences between the needs of mainstream users
and enthusiasts?<a name="more"></a> Here's what my experiences tell me.  
  

### Upgradability

First off, even before you purchase a laptop you run into problems if
you're particularly interested in the computer you end up with. There
are a huge number of different machines out there. However, laptops have
limited upgradability: they're designed to fit into a compact form
factor, making CPU, graphics or motherboard upgrades impractical or near
impossible. So, you're stuck with the fixed out-of-box specification.
And scouring the market this way to both find a machine that meets your
needs and is within your budget is not fun at all. Going the desktop
self-build route however, you can specify every part from the ground
up.  
  
Building your own desktop also means you can defer some of your spending
rather than having to try and futureproof by buying a top-end laptop.
You've got the option of using parts from older PCs as a stopgap, or
settling for more inexpensive components that you can upgrade in a year
or two.  
  
Laptops not being easily user-servicable means that many repairs that
would be relatively simple in a desktop (take out broken part, install
new part) may well involve sending your laptop to the manufacturer or
repair shop, rather frustratingly.  
  

### Usability

Laptops come with built-in keyboards and trackpads which I find awkward.
I almost always use other input devices with my laptop. Trackpads are
just too imprecise and inefficient compared with mice, while laptop
keyboards can be more cramped or may be missing the numeric keypad. (My
laptop's keyboard isn't actually that terrible, though I'm still not a
fan of [chiclet
keyboards](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Chiclet_keyboard).)  
  
Another issue with laptops is the display. At the cheap end, laptop
screens are low resolution and low quality. Even at the high end, you're
inherently limited by the size of the device: high resolution displays
are great, but if they're on, say, a 13 inch screen, everything's tiny.
I much prefer working on larger (\> 22 inch) monitors, and I always
favour plugging my laptop into an external monitor. Having to work
around the limitations of a low resolution screen by constantly
scrolling or shuffling windows around is distracting.  
  

### Power

Laptops are portable machines which has two consequences. Obviously,
they need to be small, which means there's no room for the several fans
and large heatsinks that desktop cases can accommodate. They also need
to be power efficient since they may well be running from battery power.
Both of these factors limit how powerful laptops can be, meaning desktop
hardware is the way to go for high-end consumer computing applications.  
  
This also limits them for gaming. For me, this isn't a big concern; I
don't have much time for gaming these days and the PC games I have
played have been indie titles with modest requirements (my almost seven
year old desktop still handles these well). However, there's a large
community of PC gamers who won't be satisfied by the compromises in
performance they'd have to make on choosing a laptop.  
  

### Phones and tablets versus conventional PCs

  
Since they can run the same software, I've focused on desktops versus
laptops as these devices are, in principle at least, interchangeable,
and I've not mentioned phones and tablets. Apart from their portability,
one driver of the success of phones and tablets is probably that they
are much simpler to use and maintain than full-fledged PCs. Simplified
touch interfaces and software management, along and a relative lack of
malware ([particularly on
iOS](http://www.bbc.co.uk/news/technology-23863495)) probably all
contribute. Anecdotally, I get asked far fewer questions about tablets
or phones than I ever did about Windows.  
  
At the same time, this simplicity is exactly why I find these devices so
limiting. Compounding that, phones and tablets are usually even more
restricted in storage and computing power than laptops. For uses like
video and image editing, audio work, and software development, it's hard
to see phones and tablets displacing conventional computers right now;
current mobile apps are typically far simpler than these uses demand.  
  
One possibility is that dual boot phones or tablets may eventually
displace laptops completely; carry around your phone then plug into a
monitor, keyboard and mouse when you want to do more than apps allow.
[Current
events](http://arstechnica.com/gadgets/2014/03/google-and-microsoft-are-out-to-stop-dual-boot-windowsandroid-devices/)
point to this perhaps taking a long time.  
  
Though they're of little interest to mainstream users, I think the
reasons I've given here suggest that desktops are far from redundant.
Relative to the ubiquity they had a decade ago, they'll occupy a much
smaller niche compared to the market dominance they once had, but this
is still an important one for computer enthusiasts.

</p>

