Title: Garmin Forerunner 35: a competent budget running watch
Date: 2020-11-13 22:35
Author: Steven Maude
Tags: Forerunner, Garmin, review, running
Summary: A review of the Garmin Forerunner 35 after using for several months,
         comparing with the Forerunner 15.

## Replacing a Garmin Forerunner 15 watch

Unsurprisingly, I've been doing a lot more exercise outdoors this year
than last, including a lot more running. So I've had a lot more time to
try out the Garmin Forerunner 35 GPS watch I've had since the end of
2019.

I have owned a [Garmin Forerunner
15]({filename}../2016/a-year-of-garmin.md) watch for a few years and,
especially considering what it cost, it served me well. The main issue
with it was that the battery life seemed to have deteriorated over its
lifetime. Changing the battery isn't too complex a procedure — there are
YouTube videos that show you how — but since the battery life was never
that great from new, it seemed worthwhile looking into getting a
different watch. And late last year, I saw an offer on a Garmin
Forerunner 35. The Forerunner 35, like the Forerunner 15, is again an
entry-level GPS watch, but it's a considerable upgrade from the
Forerunner 15.

## Comparing the Forerunner 35 to the Forerunner 15

Though the Forerunner 35 is comparably priced to what the Forerunner 15
cost when I bought it, there are a number of improvements and extra
features of the Forerunner 35 over the Forerunner 15.

The Forerunner 35 is a less chunky, and more subdued design than the
Forerunner 15 — looking around, there's a Forerunner 25 that looks like
an odd hybrid of the 15 and 35 designs — and has walking and outdoor
cycling modes. The screen on the 35 is also higher resolution. There's a
built-in wrist heart rate monitor. I'm not entirely sure the heart rate
measurement is always that accurate, but it removes the need for an
external sensor, if a rough idea of heart rate is what you want. The
backlight is also an improvement over the Forerunner 15. There's also
the option to pair a phone via Bluetooth, though that's not something
I've bothered to use.

On using the 35, the battery life does seem much improved over the 15. I
never wore the Forerunner 15 daily, only for runs. By contrast, I'm
wearing the Forerunner 35 I've used daily: it does need a charge every
week or so, but that doesn't usually take long. Even if low on power,
you can give it a quick boost before you head out and it will probably
tide you over for your run. With the Forerunner 15, there were numerous
times where I found it would run out of battery on longer runs. 

## Using the Forerunner 35 on Linux

Much like the old Forerunner 15, this watch still works fairly well even
if you're not using Garmin's own software. That might be because you're
not keen on sharing your data or because you're on Linux and can't
easily run the software; the Windows version may run with WINE, however.

Even if you don't use Garmin Connect, the watch gives you access to
everything you need as it appears as a USB storage device. You can
retrieve and apply GPS updates by [other
means](https://github.com/StevenMaude/armstrong); without a regular
update, GPS locking can be slow and take several minutes, as it did with
the Forerunner 15. It's also straightforward to copy the Garmin `.FIT`
files from the watch and convert them to `.gpx` with GPSBabel or
similar.

## Maintenance

The two things that usually fail on digital watches are the strap and
the battery. The Forerunner 35 has a reasonably durable strap. And the
strap's replaceable: you can at least buy third-party replacements. The
battery is another matter: Garmin don't want you to replace the battery
in any of their watches at all — and I can't find any posts or videos on
doing so for the 35. However, if the Forerunner 35 is built like the
Forerunner 15, a battery replacement could be possible if you're willing
to take the watch apart.

The battery replacement issue is one reason why I'm not inclined to
spend much more on specialist watches. You can easily spend two to four
times as much as the Forerunner 35 costs on more expensive Garmin
watches. I'm not sure how much value you get for spending more. For me,
the only significant features missing from this watch are directions to
follow a GPX route, and a swim mode. (That said, the Forerunner 35, like
the Forerunner 15, is waterproof). Neither of those omissions are enough
for me to spend considerably more. My primary use is tracking pacing and
distance while running, and the Forerunner 35 does well here.

## Overall?

Whether you're looking at replacing an older, budget running watch, or
you've not ever had such a watch and want to try one out without
spending too much, the Forerunner 35 is a quietly competent choice. It's
been a substantial upgrade from the Forerunner 15, which I also liked a
lot.
