Title: "The Missing Semester of Your CS Education": a course review
Date: 2020-06-07 20:55
Author: Steven Maude
Tags: computer science, course, Linux
Summary: A quick review and recommendation of a useful computer science
         course

## Missing semester: singular?

Though I have a science background, I don't have a formal computer
science education at all. In that sense then, a course entitled ["The
Missing Semester of Your CS Education"](https://missing.csail.mit.edu/)
is an underestimation.

In my case, they're *all* missing semesters. (I'd love to learn more and
I do keep trying to learn what I can at work, and pick up new things in
my spare time.)

But, looking over the course syllabus, I realised that, actually, I'd
already covered a fair amount of what it covers. Much of this had been
via learning at work, often from colleagues telling me about particular
tools. That actually sold the course to me: I was already aware that
some of the chosen topics were particularly useful. So, I figured, what
I didn't know might be worth knowing too.

The central theme of the course is around the tooling that developers,
especially on Linux, might use while developing software, or working at
the command-line. The course covers: working with the command-line shell
and shell scripting, text editors, version control with Git, using
debugging and profiling tools, and a little introduction to
cryptographic tools.

## Course format

With eleven lectures of about an hour each, the course is well presented
and not too lengthy. The lecture notes available on the [course
site](https://missing.csail.mit.edu/) are a useful reference and usually
fairly comprehensive. The notes don't always cover everything in the
lectures, particularly where there are worked examples. But, a skim
through the notes should give you a good impression of what's discussed,
if you prefer reading to videos.

## What I liked about the course

* Many of the lectures are self-contained. There are a few that are
  easier to follow with some basic command-line shell knowledge, but
  that too is covered in the first couple of lectures.

* Consequently, this means the course works well as a survey of topics.
  There is a little detail imparted to give you some deeper background,
  and sometimes other recommended readings. However, the level of
  presentation and the rate at which the material is worked through is
  very approachable without being overwhelming.

* The exercises for each lecture apply the ideas covered in a very
  direct and practical way. Despite the problems being artificial, it is
  possible to envisage that you might solve real problems with similar
  approaches.

## Do I recommend it?

Yes, definitely. It will probably take about ten to twenty hours
covering this material, depending on whether you watch all the videos or
just read the notes. I should emphasise again that, even if you don't
want to go through the entire course, you can easily pick out the few
lectures that might interest you.

I did learn a few things that I didn't know. And the exercises allowed
me to try working with some tools I hadn't used before (e.g. Linux
kernel cgroups).

If you're an experienced Linux developer and constantly keep up-to-date
with tools, there may not be much new here. However, for developers
starting out, those who are starting to use Linux, those who are still
in education or those, like me, who think they might have some knowledge
gaps, this course is a nice compliment to other learning resources.
