Title: A Year of Garmin: a Forerunner 15 review
Date: 2016-12-14 15:43
Author: Steven Maude
Tags: Garmin, Forerunner, review, running
Summary: After a year running with it, the Garmin Forerunner 15 GPS
         watch was definitely a great budget choice.

As I mentioned in [a previous
post]({filename}../2015/using-garmin-forerunner-watches-with-linux.md)
just after Christmas last year, I bought a new [Garmin
watch](https://buy.garmin.com/en-GB/GB/p/145621). That's also the first
GPS watch I've owned. Now I've been using it regularly for the best part
of a year, I've got a much better idea of how I use it, and what I like
about it.

And I like the Forerunner 15 a lot. Many of my favourite things focus on
doing one or a small number of tasks well. It's [why I use Rockbox on
dedicated audio player
hardware]({filename}../2016/still-rocking-rockbox.md) as opposed to some
music player app on a phone, and why I tend to use a separate camera,
not a phone, for taking photographs.
 
The FR15 is a slightly chunky digital watch, compared with the
low profile, cheap and cheerful Casio I usually wear. But it's not bulky
enough that I've ever noticed it as an extra weight on my wrist. It's
easy to just forget that it's there altogether. The strap's also
comfortable to wear. It's also waterproof to 50 metres, which means that
your investment won't be ruined by using the watch in the rain, although
it's not a swimming fitness watch. The battery life could be better, but
I usually get several runs out of it from a full charge. And it should
be capable of lasting for a marathon, even if I'm not yet.

## Connectivity

Charging and data transfer are by USB only. There's no Bluetooth
connectivity, but I prefer that there's no specific mobile or desktop
application that I'm forced to use to get my data off the watch.

As I don't use them, I can't comment on Garmin's client software or
their website where you can submit and view your data, as I copy the
data off to a PC running Linux. But, I imagine they'd have most of the
features you'd want, provided you're comfortable with Garmin storing
your location history. Alternatively, it's simple to copy the data
directly from the watch for your own processing, which is how I use it.

One thing you miss out on if you don't regularly use the official
software is updates to the ephemeris Extended Prediction Orbit (EPO)
data. This provides a cache of satellite locations for a short period of
time and helps to speed up the initial location detection of the watch.
It's also possible to download this data from Garmin without using their
software; I've mentioned solutions, [including my
own](https://github.com/StevenMaude/armstrong), in the previous post I
made on [Garmin watches and
Linux]({filename}../2015/using-garmin-forerunner-watches-with-linux.md).

Without that data to hand, the time to get a location lock can
occasionally be long enough that I've warmed up and just set off and
waited for it to catch up ten minutes later. It does vary depending on
where you are. That's not too common a problem fortunately, but if
you're racing then having the EPO data and getting the FR15 ready well
ahead of time is a good idea. Though you can prepare the watch this way
for a run, you'll need to occasionally press a button to keep the FR15
awake before starting a run, otherwise the watch's power saving feature
(which you can't disable) will turn it off. Not a huge deal, but not a
perfect design either.

# Why wear a GPS watch while running?

There's the slightly gimmicky thing of mapping runs and seeing how fast
you were running. That said, having an archive of previous runs
completed might be useful if you particularly enjoyed a route and want
to file it away to revisit at a later date.

The data collection itself isn't really important for me. Having a live
status of how far I've gone and my current pace is. That's useful both
in training runs to see if I should be trying to push myself more, or in
races to know how long I've got to go before I can finally stop. It's
useful in races for pacing too. You can set a target pace and you get an
audio alert when you're on pace, or go above or drop below it.  And
keeping good track of your progress can be a useful motivator too.  In a
10 km race this year, I worked out that if I pushed for the last 1.5 km
or so, I might just beat that time and tried to up my pace. In the very
last minute, I worked out it was possible if I ran the last 200 metres
very quickly, and that encouraged me to both try and go on to succeed.

Likewise, the watch keeping tabs on your recorded best times at various
distances (e.g. 1 km, 1 mile, 5 km) is nice to have when you realise
that you've improved on your previous best.

With all that in mind, even a low-end watch like this is more than
capable. You do lose bundled features like heart rate monitor and GPS
route navigation, but you get the most essential and useful features, at
a price that's reasonable enough. At the same time, this means the watch
is pared down to the essential features, implements them well and they
are all easy to access through the simple menus.

For a first-time user of GPS watches, I'm pleased with how good a
purchase the Forerunner 15 was, especially considering it was on sale at
the time. I looked around for a good couple of hours at reviews and
comments on watches, and concluded that you could spend a lot and still
not be entirely satisfied. It seemed most sensible to buy something
cheap and cheerful, and not be disappointed by its flaws: I'm more
forgiving of a sub-£100 watch, than maybe one that's closer to £200.

Finally, if you are shopping for GPS watches, the best resource I found
for looking at these watches is the [comprehensive set of reviews by DC
Rainmaker](https://www.dcrainmaker.com/product-reviews). When I say
"comprehensive", that is not just in the number of devices covered, but
in how rigorously they're evaluated too. Incidentally, he currently
rates the TomTom Runner as a good budget watch for Winter 2016; looking
around UK pricing, it's slightly cheaper than what the Forerunner 15
typically sells for, so may be another option to consider if you're
buying right now.
