Title: Book (and talk) review: Making Music. 74 Creative Strategies for Electronic Music Producers.
Date: 2016-06-26 12:40
Modified: 2017-05-21 20:28
Author: Steven Maude
Tags: book review, music, production 
Summary: Reviewing an Ableton tutorial book on production, and a talk by the author that discussed it.

Last week, I went to Sónar for a second time, and the sunshine and music
there feels a hazy and distant dream today. Nonetheless, it reminded me
that I had the bulk of a write-up of one of last year's Sónar+D talks
sat around for a while. It's still relevant, because of the subject
rather than the quality of my writing. So, here it is.

* * *

At Sónar 2015, I sat in on part of a session discussing how to push past
creative blocks while making electronic music. Dennis DeSantis, who has
written a [book](https://makingmusic.ableton.com) published by Ableton
on this topic, was involved in a Q&A-style event to discuss it.

What motivated the book? It was explained that the book came from
documenting his own strategies for solving specific problems in the
process of making electronic music.

Furthermore, he was insistent that these were his own strategies for
dealing with them, not a definite prescription for what you should do.
Maybe they work, but they might not: you might need to vary them or try
a completely different approach. The idea as much as anything is that,
if you're at a creative dead end, the suggestions may inspire you to mix
up what you're doing, which could reveal a new path.

Even in the time I attended, the session tackled several questions.
Here's what I took away from the insightful discussions then, much of
which the book covers too. (For whatever reason, despite enjoying the
talk, it took me a year to get around to reading the book, and you can
find my view on it below the discussion of the session.)

## How to approach that fresh, empty project file?

When all you have is nothing, making something from that can be
difficult.

It was mentioned that, if like Mozart, inspiration strikes [when you go
for a
walk](http://www.brainpickings.org/2015/02/24/mozart-on-creativity/),
then following that and seeing where it takes you is a good start. For
those of us not blessed with the talent to both be able to conjure up
wonderful music ideas away from an instrument and transcribe them into
software, we perhaps need to try something else.

In that case, just doing something — *anything* — is better than
nothing, even, as was cited, just mashing the keyboard.

Beginning with the elements that electronic music is frequently built
on, for example, drums or bass, can help too. Building some kind of hook
with one element may spark ideas to fill in the blanks with other
elements.

Developing and refining ideas by splitting production time into distinct
creative phases is another approach. First, keep everything you make,
then spend some time editing that ruthlessly. Remove anything that isn't
great. You can repeat that until you have enough material to start
building up a song.

## Having too many tools to choose from

The problem of choice is one that surely almost everyone making music
with computers has faced at some point. With a plethora of cheap or free
VST plugins available, and settings for each one, it's possible to get
lost shifting faders and turning dials without getting anywhere.

The advice there then is to deliberately restrict yourself. Just work
with a small number of tools you already have. That said, when your VST
list is large, it can actually be difficult to adhere to this.

Initially sketching out parts with very basic presets only, even as
simple as General MIDI instruments, was another insightful strategy.
That way, you're solely working on the composition side first and
foremost, then can expand on those sketches.

The idea that it's only the lack of a perfect plugin to do X, Y or Z
that's blocking your work was dismissed as well. People were making
great electronic music decades ago with much more restrictive tools than
those available to us today. DeSantis pointed out that you can go on
looking for the perfect compression plugin, but no need to look further:
you probably already have it in your collection.

## Switching software to get out of creative dead ends

By contrast to focusing on certain tools you already have, switching
digital audio workstation (DAW) completely was proposed — he candidly
admitted that Ableton may not want him to say that. This sounds like a
big leap to make, but enables you to break free of the workflow that's
dictated by the current software you're using.

By changing your DAW to one which doesn't let you quite work as you used
to, it can help break the patterns you may usually fall into, giving you
fresh inspiration. Taking this idea, it was mentioned that some
producers even move away from software entirely and use hardware
instead.

This conflicting advice reflected the idea that there are no magic
solutions for sparking creativity, only suggestions. If an approach
doesn't work, you need to try something else until you find something
that works.

## Actively listening to existing pieces for ideas

If you're a DJ, you're probably familiar with the idea that it can
sometimes be more effective to align tracks at a higher level than just
matching beats or, more commonly, bars (where the first beat of a
measure for multiple tracks play together).

To do this, you can listen to a piece of music and count the number of
bars that constituent each part of its structure. That is, in terms of
verse/chorus, or intro/build-up/drop/breakdown/outro.  With this
knowledge, you could organise playback so that, for example, build-ups
of different tracks play at once, or a build-up coincides with a
breakdown.

This also gives you a structure as a framework for making a new piece in
that style, too. You might opt for, say, a 16 bar intro and 32 bar build
up because other music in the genre uses that. And this makes the
creative process a little simpler because you already have constraints
on what you need to make a track.

What DeSantis proposed during the session was going even further:
careful listening to build up a [catalogue of
attributes](https://makingmusic.ableton.com/catalog-of-attributes). By
listening to a piece of music in depth and breaking it down into its key
components —
[elements](https://makingmusic.ableton.com/active-listening) like
rhythm, melody, and the sounds used — you have a instant starting point
of well-defined restrictions which you can take away and use as the
basis for your own work.

When taking those elements outside of the context of that piece as
inspiration, you're likely to end up with something that sounds distinct
from the original work, rather than a poor imitation.

## Knowing when a piece of music is complete

On answering this, DeSantis cited an aphorism paraphrased as "art is
never finished, only abandoned" (an internet search tells me this is
often attributed to [Paul
Valéry](https://en.wikiquote.org/wiki/Paul_Val%C3%A9ry)).

It's easy to be entangled in tweaking things forever, constantly
returning to a project and slightly adjusting it. At some point, you
should declare it as being "resolved". Resolved might mean declaring it
complete, or something that you're decidedly not going to pursue
further. In line with the above quote, it was noted that a work is never
going to achieve perfection, but it may still be good enough.

It might be that you feel instinctively that it's done. Otherwise, if
you're at the point of [diminishing
returns](https://makingmusic.ableton.com/diminishing-returns) — spending
lots of time on it without making any real progress — then that's an
indicator that your time may be better spent on the next project. If the
current project's really going nowhere, then best to look ahead to the
next.

[Deadlines](https://makingmusic.ableton.com/arbitrary-constraints) were
also mentioned as a great incentive for getting things finished: if you
don't finish on time, you don't get the job. Producers who aren't
creating as a career don't have that pressure. But you can still apply
an informal deadline: perhaps aiming to finish a piece by a certain date
or abandoning it otherwise could help you work with some time
restriction in mind.

## And how's the book?

The [sample](https://makingmusic.ableton.com) on Ableton's site is a
sizeable and representative chunk of the entire book. That alone should
an idea of whether you'd find it worthwhile, without me needing to tell
you.

There's much to like about the book. The chapters are concise and
breezy, and cover various aspects of the music creation process from
start to finish. Each chapter describes a problem and then explains a
suggested way of solving it: a style that books in other disciplines
could do well to consider. Learning how to accomplish an end goal is
highly motivating, especially when you learn something new in a five
minute read.

As the book deals with a creative process, I also liked that, as
mentioned above, the ideas are labelled just that, as suggestions only.
There might be conventions that creators use, but there aren't usually
concrete rules in creating something new. Indeed, some of the guidance
offered contradicts that offered in other chapters, representing
different approaches from which you can work.

It's short enough to read through the entire book from start to end
quickly, picking up a flavour of any ideas that are new to you, and then
placing on a shelf to refer back to as needed. The book doesn't always
delve into those ideas in great detail. However, there's enough there to
put the idea into practice and, importantly, making you aware of the
concept so that you can investigate further elsewhere.

For a wide ranging audience, this is an easy read. The assumed knowledge
of the reader is minimal, outside of some experience of working with
digital audio workstations.  For my limited background in music, this is
a good thing. That said, I think some of the exercises and ideas
suggested in starting to create something when inspiration is lacking
may well benefit much more competent readers too.

Having Ableton as book publisher is a boon for marketing the book to one
producer community, but could deter users of other software from
reading. It should be stressed that the ideas covered are software,
hardware and even genre agnostic. There's nothing presented that's
particularly Ableton specific. It would be a pity if fewer people
read it because of that; it's an enjoyable and enlightening read for
learners.
