Title: Close to the edit: what researchers can learn from journal editing
Date: 2013-05-25 18:32
Modified: 2013-07-14 13:12
Author: Steven Maude
Tags: journal, research, job, academic, editing, publishing
Slug: close-to-edit-what-researchers-can
Summary: What scientific researchers can get out of working at journals; my experience of applying for a role as editor at a high-profile journal.
Alias: /2013/05/close-to-edit-what-researchers-can.html

As I mentioned previously, I've been looking for a new job over the past
few months, since my current research contract is ending imminently.
When I started looking, all that I knew was that I wanted to work
somewhere other than a university, which doesn't really narrow down
options.

I think I've a much clearer career direction now. However, the
combination of imminent unemployment — at a time of [high
unemployment](http://www.bbc.co.uk/news/business-22180300) — and an
uncertainty about what I actually wanted to do meant that, earlier this
year, I was applying for anything that I thought that I had a good
chance of getting. (In retrospect, I think this was crucial in helping
me decide what I actually *want* to do.)

One of these jobs was as a journal editor. Until now, my only dealings
with journal editors have involved me submitting manuscripts to
journals, and resolving any corrections. I hadn't ever given much
consideration as to what their role really involves.

If you're unfamiliar with the academic world, [peer-reviewed
journals](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Academic_journal) are an
important feature. Researchers send work to a journal and then, provided
the editors and the peer reviewers deem it suitable, they'll publish it.
The reputation of the journal in which work is published is important: a
researcher's publication record has a massive influence on future
funding applications. It can also hugely increase the audience of a
research work: many scientific stories reported in mainstream media are
often sourced from the big journals, like
[Nature](http://www.nature.com/) or [Science](http://www.sciencemag.org/).

Publishing in high profile journals is obviously both highly desirable
and highly competitive. Editors are sent many manuscripts and then have
the difficult task of reading through them and making quick decisions on
whether to submit them for peer review. For the best journals, good
papers are just not good enough. Maintaining the journal's prestige
means that they have to try to pick out the outstanding papers.

As part of my editor application, I was sent three manuscripts covering
three very different scientific topics. For this editing exercise, I had
to summarise the main research finding and argue whether or not the
paper should be sent for peer review. In one case, I understood quickly
what their idea was, but the other two took me far longer to
appreciate.

A paper in your own area of expertise is fairly easy to consider. You
instinctively have a feel for what is novel. On the other hand, with
little experience of a subject, it's incredibly difficult to appreciate
the context and impact of a scientific work. You have to do your own
background research to figure out what the current state of that area of
research, where the paper you're reading fits in, and therefore how
important it is.

This probably isn't as much of a problem for editors of specialised
journals: they have fairly narrow scopes. Editors in journals with a
wider remit no doubt have a much tougher time here.

So, if you're an eager scientist sending your work to a high profile,
multidisciplinary journal, what can you do? Well, apart from making sure
that your research is clearly written up for other researchers, you also
need to give consideration to the editor who will be the first hurdle to
getting your work published. The background context, what your work
contributes and the aspects distinguishing this work from other papers
must all be absolutely clear. The editors reading your work may well be
experienced scientists themselves, but they might be completely
unfamiliar with that particular area of research.

In the end, I had a pleasant interview which went well, although I
didn't actually get offered the job. (As I want to leave the physical
sciences behind entirely, I think it would have been a misstep for me to
take it if it were offered.) Nonetheless, the process was still a useful
one when thinking about writing up my remaining papers.

Finally, there's a parallel of this process in submitting job
applications. When applying for a job, you'll often send a cover letter
and CV. At some point, a recruiter is going to look over them and make a
snap decision as to your suitability for the job. Again, they've
probably got a big stack of documents to get through. And, once again,
making an immediate impression is critical: you need to jump off the
page.
