Title: Beatmatching; five reasons why digital DJs should learn, and how Traktor can help
Date: 2014-01-16 18:24
Modified: 2014-02-09 20:41
Author: Steven Maude
Tags: sync, DJ, laptop, Traktor, beatmatching, digital
Slug: beatmatching-five-reasons-why-digital
Summary: Why digital DJs should learn to beatmatch, and the tools that Traktor offers for practice and training.

2014/02/09: An edited version of this post was recently republished on
[DJ
TechTools](http://www.djtechtools.com/2014/01/31/how-traktor-can-help-you-learn-to-beatmatch/).

## DJ software: complete with the kitsch in sync

![Sync button from a Vestax VCI-100]({filename}/images/sync.jpg)
There's a view — one I guess is primarily propagated by people who were DJing
long before the likes of Traktor and Serato[^1] came
along — that using [software on laptops doesn't really "count" as
DJing](http://www.digitaldjtips.com/2013/05/is-it-right-to-ban-laptops-from-dj-booths/)
[because you don't need to
beatmatch](http://djworx.com/sync-the-djs-big-red-button/). Algorithms
for beat detection usually work well enough these days that software can
usually have a good go at this for you.

It's a slightly odd opinion though, and one that I actually think does
DJing a disservice. The implication of beatmatching being so important
is that there's little more to DJing than that. Just get the beats
matching up or push the sync button, and, that's it, congratulations,
you are now a DJ and your membership card will be in the post!

What's strange to me is that you'd think, as DJs, they'd be aware of the
importance of everything *other* than beatmatching that goes into even a
simple A-B mix. Track selection and sequencing, transitions between
tracks, EQing, harmonic mixing are things that sync won't handle.
Software's not really going to easily handle this for
you[^2] as a lot of it is down to personal preference
and choice, as well as the type of music you're playing. (Oh, sync is
entirely optional too: no-one forces you to push that button.)

## Why beatmatching is worth your time

Having said all that, there are still good reasons why it's still worth
learning:

1. **Lets you use other equipment.** Imagine you only ever rode a
bicycle with stabiliser wheels; great, you can ride a bike all day long.
Except the time you have to use a bike without stabilisers instead. It
means it shouldn't take be too much of a struggle to adjust if you end
up playing on CDJs or vinyl/DVS.

2. **Sync is good, but not always perfect.** Annoyingly, Traktor still
uses a fixed beatgrid. (I think Serato actually has warp markers, but
I'm unfamiliar with it, so feel free to correct me on this.) Provided a
track has a well-defined bpm, which most electronic dance music does, it
does pretty well at detecting it.

However, a simple beatgrid can break down with tracks with live,
unquantised percussion or where there are particularly unusual rhythms
or switch ups.. Knowing how to handle cases where sync fails completely
or where minor adjustments (e.g. with tempo bend) are necessary is
essential to keep beats from drifting.

3. **No need to analyze and beatgrid tracks in advance.** This isn't a
bad thing to take the time to do: with Traktor: tempo-based effects and
looping can sound off if the track does not have the correct beatgrid.
On the other hand, being able to throw a new track into software and
immediately play it without worry is really convenient.

4. **Mixing into the end of someone else's set.** Some DJs will start
afresh; some will beatmatch into it. Choice is a good thing. No DJ
software beat matches to an external sound source as far as I'm aware.
(I'm willing to be corrected again though; [it's not just me that's
thought of this](http://forum.mixvibes.com/viewtopic.php?t=27333).)

5. **Beatmatching is good practice for listening closely**, especially
when you're trying to selectively "tune" in and out from the track being
faded in. This is useful regardless of how you're beatmatching (e.g. for
EQ purposes).

## What Traktor offers

Traktor has several features to aid beatmatching. If you're learning to
do this manually, the natural inclination is to think, "OK, if I'm
learning to do this myself, I shouldn't use any of these tools ." But,
when you're learning to manually beatmatch, **these features are still
really useful**. So what do we have?

![Traktor deck showing sync button, phase meter and grid options with a BPM counter]({filename}/images/Traktor_layout.png)

### Phase meter

You can practice with the phase meter to see how far off you are after
you think you've beatmatched correctly, or just check how far off the
beat you are when hitting play or scratching in a track. The phase meter
shows you how far ahead or behind the current track is relative to the
track that's currently the master. If the bar is in the middle of the
phase meter, the track is in phase with the master. In the example
above, the track is over a quarter of a beat ahead.

*(Note that both tracks you're playing need to have correct beatgrids
otherwise the phase meter is likely to be misleading.)*

Of course, you can always use your ears for this, but the phase meter
gives you a quick visual indication of how well you've done.

### BPM counter

You can check BPMs immediately when you think you've matched tracks as
well as possible[^3]. One easy way is just to click the
GRID option directly below a deck (you can also add a permanent BPM
counter in Preferences > Track Decks > Deck Header.)

This gives you a direct indication of how far off a match you actually
were; if you're only a couple of hundredths of a BPM out, you're doing
pretty well.

Importantly, you can see that you're improving even if you haven't quite
got the hang of it. To reuse the bike analogy, the learning curve is
pretty steep. First, you fall off a lot, then you start riding albeit a
little wobbly. I found beatmatching pretty similar: for quite a while, I
couldn't manage it, then all of a sudden I could (though quite badly).
You then become steadier and grow in confidence with practice.

(One gotcha with beatgridding is that if Traktor may well have detected
a BPM half or double what it should be, e.g. tracks at 140 BPM might be
detected as 70. If the BPMs of the two tracks are reportedly wildly
different, but you seem to have beatmatched them nonetheless, that's
probably why.)

### Sync

One exercise often mentioned in beginner beatmatching tutorials is to
mix two identical tracks. When I was starting out, I found this sounds
cluttered and confused me a little. Unsurprisingly, it's sometimes
really hard to distinguish the two tracks as they sound the same.

Using different tracks might be easier. However, the tracks you're using
might not be the same speed which leads to the chicken-and-egg problem
of *how can you beatmatch before you've learnt to beatmatch?* In this
case, the sync button should handle it for you with one push of a
button.

If you're not sure what a "perfect" mix of the current two tracks should
sound like, the sync button will give you that too. You can then nudge
one track slightly out of phase with the other using tempo bend to
easily hear the difference, say, when a monitored track is ahead versus
the live track; also useful in developing beatmatching skills.

### Recording

![Traktor's audio recorder options]({filename}/images/Audio_recorder.png)

It's not always easy to judge how well your beatmatching is while you're
actually doing it. Recording your practice and listening back to see how
it actually sounds to a listener is pretty simple with one click. Are
the beats matched together perfectly or not? Did you let the beats drift
at all through a blend?

### A comment on MIDI controllers

One design choice that I would criticise about many MIDI controllers is
that their pitch faders tend to be on the small side. This makes it
difficult to accurately beatmatch, since precise adjustments (hundredths
of a BPM) are tricky. One workaround is to map a knob as a fine pitch
control with a much smaller range.

This lets you lock in to the rough BPM using the pitch fader, then use
the knob to make very small corrections.

## Summary

**As long as software doesn't perfectly get beatmatching correctly with
zero preparation, there's still a need for beatmatching.** Not only that,
*software can actually help you practice and improve too: I self-taught
myself beatmatching with Traktor and a MIDI controller.* Let me know if
you've done the same.

[^1]: Also see
open source alternatives like [Mixxx](http://www.mixxx.org/) and
[xwax](http://xwax.org/). Mixxx in particular looks really promising.
Unfortunately, my controller isn't really supported (the pitch faders
don't work correctly when I last tried, using a old VCI-100 running [DJ
TechTools v1.4
firmware](http://www.djtechtools.com/2010/09/19/brand-new-vci-100-firmware-1-4-hd-updat/)
to improve the resolution of the jogwheels and pitch faders.)

[^2]: Note that there are key detection
algorithms that can help guide harmonic mixing. There two big problems
though. One is that [they're not
perfect](http://www.djtechtools.com/2013/02/20/traktor-key-detection-just-how-good-is-it/)
yet; the estimates there (on a small set of songs, admittedly) is around
60-70% accuracy. And, if they were, all that does is tell you the
*current track's key*. Even if you select your next track on the basis
of key, it's not going to decide this for you and there are several
choices. Do you stick to the same key? Do you pick the relative
major/minor, or the parallel major/minor or even ascend/descend by a
perfect fifth? Or completely eschew all that and perhaps choose
something in a different key, maybe bringing it in a non-melodic
section?

[^3]: Again, you need to make sure that the tracks you're using for practice
have been correctly beatgridded.
