Title: How universities can help develop researchers' post-university careers
Date: 2013-08-18 22:20
Modified: 2014-12-13 00:27
Author: Steven Maude
Tags: researcher, university, postdoc, PhD, job, career
Slug: how-universities-can-help-develop
Summary: My account of a new and intensive career development programme for postdoctoral researchers leaving university.
Alias: /2013/08/how-universities-can-help-develop.html

> "You do three years, then a couple
> more, and then – my God, what next? A master's, a PhD … and never a
> job at the end of it." - [Sylvia
> Melchiorre](http://www.guardian.co.uk/world/2013/jul/01/jobless-europe-young-qualified)

In embarking on research work at university, there's always a risk that
you can get dragged along uncontrollably with the tide. When finishing
up a three or four year PhD, it can be stressful enough without even
considering the impending unemployment that will imminently follow. So,
if you're in that situation and your PhD supervisor suggests that you
apply for a forthcoming postdoc contract, you may well, just as I did,
do that since it's an easy solution to this predicament. It's a
comfortable option, since it postpones any serious (and tricky) career
decisions for a couple more years.

In my case, all was well until this problem reared its head again as I
reached the final six months of my postdoc contract. I had questioned
what was next, but didn't really know how to go about answering that
question. I'd been in university so long that I had no idea of what my
options were: what else, other than research, can you do with the skills
you've acquired as a researcher?[^1]

Despite that predicament, when I received an email advertising a careers
programme for postdocs working in medical engineering, I initially
passed it up as being something not very useful for me. My (admittedly
misguided) impression was that it would be all time-wasting whiteboard
exercises.

Thankfully in the end, I did apply, but only after having my arm twisted
by a [friend](https://twitter.com/Dr_D_Miles)who went to a meeting
outlining the programme and was greatly enthusiastic about it. In
retrospect, I feel pretty stupid that I could have easily missed out,
since it's been greatly helpful in pointing out alternative careers and
taught me a lot in how I should be presenting myself to prospective
employers.

In fact, I've been **incredibly** fortunate. My feeling is that this kind
of intensive programme is rarely offered to PhD students or postdocs.

What the programme involved was several small group meetings over a few
months with advice and support on offer from the course organisers, and
each other. Each week discussed a different theme and we covered just
about every aspect of career management, from identifying possible
careers, to writing CVs and cover letters, to networking and other job
search approaches, to interviews. Given that comprehensive coverage of
job searching, the title the course had ("Career Architect") certainly
wasn't unreasonable.

## Why did this approach work so well?

### 1. It provided time to think.

Career planning is not something that I personally have never really
taken time out to sit down and think about. It's just one of those
things that never seems a priority (though it definitely is!) If you're
busy in your existing job, you don't get time to think about future
moves. And, if you're in the process of finding a new job, survival
instinct usually kicks in and you immediately start searching for
vacancies and sending applications, rather than spending a long time
considering what you actually want.

The course's structure meant that it forced us to consider our career
path head-on, rather than putting it off for another day. We had regular
group meetings, and had to spend time between meetings working on
exercises, which were designed to get us thinking about career options
and help narrow down the possible choices.

### 2. It provided time for the staff to understand our motivations.

I'd previously considered consulting the university careers service. On
reflection, I don't think this would have been too effective. It's hard
for someone to advise you in a brief meeting without knowing you that
well. They can certainly give you some basic pointers and point you to
reading material to explore, but this isn't going to be very specific
advice geared to what you, as an individual, want.

By contrast, the rapport that we developed with the staff over a period
of weeks and months was a real benefit. They developed a great
understanding of who we were and where we wanted to go, which helped
them to give us personalised advice.

### 3. It provided us with mentors who were willing to discuss ideas and approaches.

Not only did we have the enjoyable regular meetings, but we had constant
— and exemplary — email and phone support from the staff. Having the
outside opinion of people who know a lot about career development is
incredibly valuable: rather than dithering over some decision, say, for
example, what to put on an application form, being able to ask somebody
who's going to have a well-considered opinion is a boon. Through this
consultation, my CV was completely transformed in the space of a few
days and several phone calls from being mediocre into something that I
was happy to send out.

### 4. It provided peer support.

Job searching is usually carried out in isolation. Because of that, it's
easy to worry and lose perspective on your situation, especially when
facing rejection. Knowing the similar trials that others are going
through is a great way to put some perspective on your own troubles and
really does help to keep you motivated, rather than disheartened. That
outside perspective is incredibly helpful in stabilising your view of
your situation which can easily become skewed if you're experiencing
rejection.

In the six months before the course started, I'd applied for positions
on and off, but I'd go into lulls of being incredibly fed up following
rejections only to have to pick myself up and spend more time completing
applications. Here, the continuous support, feedback and encouragement
from peers (and staff) was a tremendous boost in keeping me motivated
during the often frustrating task of applying for work.

* * * * *

## So, what should universities be doing?

Well, as [many PhD and postdoctoral
researchers are unlikely to have a permanent academic
career](http://www.economist.com/node/17723223), universities should be
making a decent effort to help researchers plan for a future outside
university. Helping future alumni to hopefully go on to success in
industry jobs is certainly a good advertisement for the university
too.

What I've learned is that career moves are a lot of work. The sooner
career planning is started, the better. As glad as I am that I went
through the process, it was a very intense five months' work and I would
have much preferred to begun this much earlier. Retrospectively, it
might even have been wise to started preparing when I first started my
two year postdoc...

Of course, it's probably a little unreasonable to expect every
researcher to be provided with such thorough and specialised one-to-one
career coaching, though it would be nice. Nonetheless, providing ongoing
peer support and the time for researchers to begin considering their
careers shouldn't be too difficult or expensive to arrange. Talks given
by career advisers on things to consider in career decision making, and
approaches to job searching would definitely be a start: I've recently
learnt about several job search strategies that I hadn't previously
heard of. Also, hearing from speakers who've already made the
progression from academic research to positions outside university could
offer a helpful insight into how best to make this successful change.

Perhaps these kinds of events for postdocs were already ongoing and I
just wasn't aware of them. (I knew there were lots of careers events for
undergraduates, but job searching for experienced researchers is a
distinct process.) In that case, it may be sensible for those in careers
services to better publicise them or more strongly encourage researchers
to take an afternoon or so out of the lab or office to attend.

Finally, I should give a very special thank you to the
[three](http://www.sddu.leeds.ac.uk/sddu-patricia-gray.html)
[wonderful](https://twitter.com/Penny_Foster1)
[staff](https://twitter.com/RuthWinden) who ran the course at the
University of Leeds and
[those](http://www.imbe.leeds.ac.uk/people/imbe/staff/j.fisher)
[who](http://www.imbe.leeds.ac.uk/people/imbe/staff/j.e.dixon-hardy)
were responsible for it existing in the first place!

[^1]: Actually, as I learned
through the course, more than you might think. As an experienced
researcher, you've probably developed a lot of research, organisational,
presentation, and team working skills that are readily transferable to
work outside university, even if you move outside of the research area
you've worked in for so long.
